## “Interfaces off the Screen: The Case of Arduino” 

Shaun Macpherson and Jentery Sayers, University of Victoria | Maker Lab in the Humanities 

Since the emergence of personal computers in the 1980s—if not cinema in the 1880s or television in the 1910s—the very notion of an interface has been more or less welded to screens. Consider the current prominence of graphical-, gesture-, and touch-based designs ubiquitous across desktops, laptops, tablets, gaming consoles, and mobile phones. Screens are everywhere. They economize our attention, and the ocular logic of their construction dominates contemporary interface design, even as that design becomes increasingly tactile in character. Engaging the ongoing prominence of screen essentialism in computational culture, this essay unpacks how interfaces are articulated not solely through software, graphics, or programming languages but also at the level of hardware and circuitry. Its case study (or “boundary object”) is Arduino, a small, open-source microprocessor used to build intelligent environments, which—in a fashion resonating with Katherine Hayles’s 1999 definition of the posthuman—actuate, sense, and network the actions of both people and machines. Importantly, Arduino is intertwined with a long history of hardware hacking, glitching, hamming, and homebrewed electronics that, for a variety of reasons, resist screen-based mediation in favor of tacit engagements with computation and electricity. Yet, despite its simplicity and friendliness to hands-on tinkering, the Arduino supports some highly complex computational behaviors, including 3D printing, face recognition, infrared sensing, and data logging. For audiences new to Arduino, this essay begins with an overview of the device’s history, composition, and intended uses. It then outlines a taxonomy—steeped in concrete examples drawn from existing physical computing projects—of the various kinds of “screen-free” or “screen-resistant” interfaces Arduino affords. Finally, the essay concludes by situating Arduino in relation to critical theories of interfaces and mixed reality, with an emphasis on screen essentialism and visual design. Motivated by Alexander Galloway’s claim that an interface is “unworkable”—that it is at once an immediate medium and effect of social relations—the authors argue that Arduino (in particular) and physical computing cultures (in general) do not somehow escape the logic of interfaces by redirecting people’s attention away from screens, software, or programming languages. Instead, Arduino foregrounds how the very logic of computational interfaces persists off the screen, even in the perceived, posthuman absence of clearly demarcated artifacts and users. This observation does not suggest that interfaces are immaterial or imaginary. In fact, the authors argue quite the opposite: with the rapid growth of intelligent environments and low-cost microprocessors, the stuff of interfaces is now congealing around the physical dynamics of human-computer interactions, which merely appear all the more immediate.  

Shaun Macpherson is a graduate student in both English and Cultural, Social, and Political Thought at the University of Victoria. He is currently working at the Maker Lab in the Humanities as assistant coordinator and co-lead on the lab's “Kits for Cultural History” project, which is supported by the Social Sciences and Humanities Research Council of Canada.  

Jentery Sayers is Assistant Professor of English and Director of the Maker Lab in the Humanities at the University of Victoria. His work has appeared in Digital Studies; e-Media Studies; The International Journal of Learning and Media; Kairos: Rhetoric, Technology, and Pedagogy; Computational Culture; The Information Society; Collaborative Approaches to the Digital in English Studies; ProfHacker; Sounding Out!; The New Everyday; The New Work of Composing; Off Paper; and Writing and the Digital Generation, among others. The National Endowment for the Humanities, the Canadian Foundation for Innovation, and the Social Sciences and Humanities Research Council of Canada have supported his research. His first monograph, How Text Lost Its Source: Magnetic Recording Cultures, is under contract with the University of Michigan Press.



